# Advanced-Port-Scanning-using-Nmap
Advanced Port scanning using Nmap

Port scanning is defined as scanning the network to find ports that are active i.e. open or unfiltered, it also helps in knowing whether the firewall is present and the name of the application using that particular port, the version, services, protocol used and so on. Ports have different services being used. A port ranges between 0 to 65535 in a system, among them 0 to 1023 are identified as standard ports which are assigned to services assigned by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA). 

Essentially a port scan sends client requests to one or a range of ports and wait for a reply, based on the reply we can understand whether the ports are open, closed, filtered or unfiltered. Generally, TCP and UDP protocols are used. Most commonly used port scans for TCP are TCP scan or connect, SYN scan, XMAS scan, NULL scan, FIN scan and ACK scan. And for UDP, since it is a connectionless protocol, it does not need a two-way handshake in order to start communicating since it only receives data. It does not send an acknowledgement, if the port does not respond then the port is open since it is receiving and if it is closed it will respond. By doing a port scan we also can determine whether the firewall is effective and whether the networks and servers are vulnerable. It helps in knowing the strength of the network.

Nmap Script Engine (NSE) is a digital library of Nmap scripts and is one of Nmap’s most powerful features and it extends the capabilities of Nmap. NSE uses simple scripts written in Lua programming language. The scripts created performs a wide variety of automated network tasks and reports them. The main results that are achieved through open ports using Nmap script engine are network & service discovery, advanced version detection, vulnerability detection, detection of malware, backdoor detection and exploitation. All of these scripts are stored in the “script category”. 

Nmap also allows users to create their own scripts and hence not limiting to the default scripts but with the requirement of programming the script with Lua programming language. It has more than 600 scripts in its library (Esteban Borges, 2019).
Nmap Scripting Engine is very efficient and easy to use, since it provides a lot of scripts it is very difficult to choose which is useful. So NSE has an option where if the command is executed with -sC, it will run the topmost powerful scripts which makes it very convenient for the user. Thus, making it a very useful and powerful tool in gathering information for exploitation.
